# How Do Brazilian Software Development Teams Deal with Working From Home After a Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic?

*author's:* Carla I. M. Bezerra, Amarildo Barros de Araújo, Emanuel F. Coutinho.

The COVID-19 pandemic has lasted for over 1 year. During the pandemic, several software development companies migrated to working from home (WFH). Several studies in the literature have recorded an initial moment of adaptation to WFH. It was found in the studies that there was an initial impact of adapting to WFH, but the teams continued good productivity. Besides, there may be changes in the software development process due to this change. This study investigated how Brazilian software development teams dealt with WFH after 1 year of a pandemic and how this change in work was on the software development process. We applied a survey with 67 participants of software development teams and investigated aspects, as: work routine, collaboration, communication, productivity, financial assistance and software development process. We performed a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the survey results and compared them with previous studies on remote work at the beginning of the pandemic. Our key findings are: (i) 56.71% of the participants said that it has an impact on the work routine related to work overload and exceeds the company's standard hours; (ii) 92.54% of the participants consider their team to be collaborative; (iii) 82.70% are satisfied with the communication at WFH; (iv) 86.55\% has meetings once or twice a day; (v) 59.7% had an improvement in productivity in WFH and 75% are satisfied with their productivity; (vi) 79.60% receive some assistance from the company for WFH; (vii) 82.1% said that the company intends or probably intends to continue in the WFH, and (viii) 55.2% said they had changed in the software development process due to WFH. The main positive changes in the process are related to the practices of: daily meetings, agile processes, code review, pair programming and code versioning.
